# Graph Theory, Combinatorics and Group Theory using the Computer Algebra System SageMath

This repository represents my playground for exploring the beautiful software system SageMath which plays a fundamental role in all of my research. The code does not follow any particular structure and is most likely not up to date.

The code might be given in the form of Jupyter notebooks, standalone Python scripts which use the Sage library or by writing interpreted and compiled programs in Sage directly. The last option will most likely stay an exception.

## Graph Theory

A graph is a set $G=(V, E)$ of sets satisfying $E \subseteq [V]^2$. The elements of $V$ are called vertices, the elements of $E$ are called edges. Sometimes we simply write $G$ and denote the set of vertices of $G$ by $V(G)$ and the set of edges of $G$ by $E(G)$. A self-loop is an edge $(v,v) \in E$, that is, a vertex connected to itself. A graph might have multiple edges connecting one vertex to another, that is, an edge $(v_x, v_y) \in E$ might appear multiple times. A graph is called *simple* graph if it does not admit self-loops or multiple edges. If we endow the set $E$ with a partial order, then the corresponding graph $G$ is called a *directed* graph. A graph is undirected if the set $E$ is not endowed with a partial order, that is any pair $(v_x, v_y)$ in $E$ is unordered. A graph is called *finite* if its set of vertices and its set of edges is finite.

Therefore, a graph is a discrete structure endowing all pairs of $V$ with a binary relation. Notice that this might be generalized to a so called *hypergraph*, that is a graph which allows its edges to contain any number of vertices and thus it is endowed with a $k$-nary relation on $V$.

## Group Theory

A set $G$ is a group if the following criteria are satisfied:

1. There is a binary operation $*$ on $G$.
2. $*$ is associative.
3. There is an identity element $e \in G$. That is: $$e*g=g=g*e, \forall g \in G.$$
4. Every element $g \in G$ has an inverse, $g^{-1}$, satisfying $$g*g^{-1}=e=g^{-1}*g.$$

We call the members of a group elements and use basic set theory notation.

If $*$ is a binary operation on a set $S$, then $s*t \in S$ for all $s,t$ in $S$. In this case, we say that $S$ is *closed* under the operation $*$. Combining two group elements is a binary operation and we say that it is a binary operation on the group. A binary operation $*$ on a set $S$ is called associative if it satisfies the associative law: $$(x*y)*z=x*(y*z), \forall x,y,z \in S.$$
A group $(G, *)$ is called *abelian* if $a*b=b*a$ for all $a,b$ in $G$.

A *generator* of a group is an element of the group such that any other element of the group can be generated by combining the generator with itself using the binary operation of the group. Usually, a single element is not enough in order to generate the whole group. A *generating* set for a group is a subcollection of elements of the group that together can produce all elements of the group. All elements of this subcollection are called generators in this case. We write $G=\langle g_x, g_y \rangle$ to say that $G$ is generated by the elements of $g_x$ and $g_y$. We usually give a precise definition on *how* a group is generated using its generators. To do so, we use a group *presentation* of the following form: $$G=\langle \text{generators}\ |\ \text{relations} \rangle.$$ There are some basic properties that follow directly from the definition of a group. Every group has an unique identity element. Every element of a group has an unique inverse element.

We can represent groups using a special graph, called *Cayley graph*.

Let $G$ be a group and $S$ be a generating set of $G$. The Cayley graph $\Gamma=(G,S)$ is an edge-colored directed graph constructed as follows:

* Each element $g$ of $G$ is assigned a vertex: the vertex set of $\Gamma$ is identified with $G$.
* Each $s$ of $S$ is assigned a color $c_s$.
* For every $g \in G$ and $s \in S$, there is a directed edge of color $c_s$ from the vertex corresponding to $g$ to the one corresponding to $g*s$.

If an element $s \in S$ is a its own inverse, then it is typically represented by an undirected edge.

Now, that we have introduced groups, we are going to explore them using SageMath.

## References

[1] Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory (Graduate Texts in mathematics). 5th ed. Vol. 173.
Springer, 2017.

[2] James Munkres. Topology. Pearson Education, 2014.

[3] Nathan Carter. Visual group theory. Vol. 32. American Mathematical Soc. 2021.

[4] Matthew Macauley. Math 4120 (Modern Algebra). 2021 [accessed 2022 Jan 16]. http://www.math.clemson.edu/~macaule/classes/f21_math4120/.

[5] SageMath, the Sage Mathematics Software System (Version 9.4.0), The Sage Developers, 2021, https://www.sagemath.org.
